This directory contains the GENESIS piriform cortex simulation.

It is organized to allow the user to investigate a variety of phenomena:

1) Various kinds of stimuli:

   a) random background inputs
   b) strong shock stimuli
   c) weak shock stimuli
   d) "eeg-like" input stimuli

   Within each category there are a number of variations on the basic themes.

2) The effects of norepinephrine (NE) on the network's behaviors.

3) The effect of subdividing the inputs and/or the network connections
   themselves into non-overlapping neuronal groups.

There is a fair amount of redundancy at the top level of the simulation
files.  The file "piriform.g" includes just about everything, but doesn't
necessarily use it (the commented-out sections reflect this).  Therefore,
there are a lot of versions of this file:

-- piriform_ss.g         (steady-state values of neurons)
-- piriform_bg.g         (response to background inputs)
-- piriform_bgNE.g       (response to background inputs with NE)
-- piriform_strong.g     (response to strong shock inputs)
-- piriform_strongNE.g   (response to strong shock inputs with NE)
-- piriform_weak.g       (response to weak shock inputs)
-- piriform_weakNE.g     (response to weak shock inputs with NE)
-- piriform_eeg.g        (response to EEG-like inputs)
-- piriform_eegNE.g      (response to EEG-like inputs with NE)

The EEG-like inputs were basically an experiment, and they didn't yield much
in the way of good results.  Similarly, the neuromodulated versions of the
simulation (the xxxNE.g files) didn't yield much of interest.

Most inputs can be run using the Makefile.  For instance, to compute
steady-state values for the neurons, you can either do:

    % nxgenesis piriform_ss.g

or just

    % make ss

(where % is the unix prompt, of course).  Note that you *must* compute
steady-state values before running any of the other kinds of simulations.

Output files are stored in the "results" directory, typically in a numbered
subdirectory e.g. "results/1".  If you look at the file "piriform.g" you will
see where the output files are specified.  Many of the output files are in
the xview format; you need a working version of Matt Wilson's "xview" program
to view them.  I have a modified version of xview that actually works (!)
which I will make available to anyone who wants it.  Since it is very common
to alter various .g files from simulation to simulation, all the simulation
files are copied to the results directory every time a simulation is run.  It
will also be useful to have a copy of Matt Wilson's "xplot" program, which is
distributed with the main genesis distribution.

In order to run any of this, you will need a copy of my genesis source tree,
and you will need to compile it on a Linux machine.  Standard genesis WILL
NOT WORK with this simulation, now or in the foreseeable future.

DO NOT remove the files starting with "data" e.g. "data_Vm_noNE.full".  These
are files of intracellular data that were used to parameterize the neuron
models.

Enjoy!

Mike Vanier (mvanier@cs.caltech.edu)

